My name is Chandrika Joshi and it is the 29th of February 2024 at 4 o'clock.
I'm interviewing Alnashir Pabani at his home in Astrad, Pentra in the Rwanda.
Hi there, I'm Alnashir Pabani and it's a pleasure to do this interview.
So there you go, what would you like me to tell you?
Tell me about your memories of Uganda, your family in Uganda.
Well, the earliest memories I got are, I can still remember when I was in primary school.
I used to walk to school and as you know the weather out there was so hot.
So you'd have sessions of school where the hot periods, they'd close the school.
And then you'd go back in the late afternoon to finish off the hours.
Yeah, basically it was a good time, hard times.
Dad was always in work, Mum was always cooking and you know we were always in school.
I used to play a lot of sports as I was growing up.
Used to play a lot of football, cricket, you know, all things like that.
But then with growing up, you know, you learn different things and I wasn't very good in school.
And after a few years, then as 1972, all the problems started in Uganda.
And all the British passport holders and all the Asians were expelled from Uganda.
Tell me where you were in Uganda, which town?
Well, I was born in a small place called Saroti.
I stayed with my grandparents and I studied in Saroti Primary School.
And then we moved to Mbali.
And I was in Mbali then and then the late, late, well early 70s then we moved to Kampala.
In my grandfather's house because of all the problems.
But yeah, up until then Mbali was my home and yes, I loved it. Brilliant.
So did your parents migrate or was it your grandparents who migrated?
Well, it was my grandparents who came to Uganda, well East Africa really.
Because at that time the British were building the railways.
So my grandparents, they came and I don't know much about my grandmother,
because I think she stayed behind for a while.
But my grandfather arrived basically to work on the railways.
And he used to travel back and forth, back and forth to the railways.
And he realized it wasn't for him. He just didn't want to work on the railways.
So what he did, he decided to put all his money, hired a load of Africans to carry all the groceries.
So he used to buy all the stuff, travel all the way to the railways.
It didn't matter which area, whether it was Uganda, Kenya or Tanzania.
He'd travel through the jungles all the way with carrying all this.
And he'd sell all the products to the railway workers.
And then after a few years, once everybody got to know him,
and he decided that he was going to open a shop.
So when he was traveling around, he had found this patch in the middle of nowhere in Uganda.
And he called it Paranga.
And he opened a little shop, basically a shed with a room in the back where he was sleeping.
And he told all the railway workers, you can come to me now and buy whatever you want.
And basically they used to there buy any.
And if they needed something, he'd make a note of it so he'd get it for them.
And that's how he opened his first shop.
It was Ahmad Haji, his name, Ahmad Haji Pabani.
And yeah, he then basically brought my grandmother over.
And it just built up from that.
And my memory of that town in Paranga is roughly down to about 11, 12 houses and a schoolhouse.
And that's where Mum and Dad and we used to live.
I remember the schoolhouse.
And you know, one of the memories of the schoolhouse is when we had the rainy season,
the orchard, it was full of oranges and grapefruits,
and you'd have the heavy rains.
And when you go out there, you had a blanket of fruit on the ground
because the rain was so heavy.
Because the rain was so heavy, you know.
It was fabulous.
I always remember that.
That is one memory that's stuck in my head.
Really good, you know.
So yeah, there was a schoolhouse there.
And what he did, my grandfather, he built another shop.
And then he'd send to India to get his friends over.
And bit by bit, all his friends come over.
So there was a grocery shop, then you had a bicycle shop,
you had a car shop, you know, a mechanic and things like that.
So he was an entrepreneur?
So yeah, he was. He was.
And yeah, he did quite well there.
He built the whole community.
That's right.
It wasn't a very big community, but he built it.
And then he moved to Soroti then.
So this town, your grandfather started out in, whereabouts was it, in Uganda?
Oh, do you know what you're asking?
All I know, it was called Paranga.
You know, and it wasn't far from the border of Kenya, actually, you know, Kisumo?
Oh yeah, Kisumo.
Yes, yeah.
He said the borderline.
That's right.
Around there it was. It wasn't very far.
And I think the reason he opened it there was it was closer to the border
for the guys to come from the railways in Kenya, you know.
So yeah.
And your grandfather would have gone from India to sort of Mombasa with the railways?
That's right, yeah.
So anything he talked about, how he travelled?
Well, all I know is he came over on a ship he did, but didn't know much about it.
And a lot of this information I found out was through my uncle.
Because my uncle was in Britain studying when everything kicked off.
So he told me quite a lot and there were some photographs which he wouldn't give me.
Because the reason I was asking all these questions, in the mid-70s I started writing it all down.
Right? I started writing it all down.
So I was looking for information myself, you know.
So all I know is he came from India and then he sort of travelled through the three countries where the railways were being built.
I don't think there was much to do with Tanzania, but it was more Uganda and Kenya, you know.
Yeah. And I presume they came from Gujarat or Kutch was it?
Kutch, yeah it was Kutch it was.
And Mundra?
Yes, that's right, Kutch, Mundra.
And that's where my mother is from as well.
And basically my great-grandfather was still out in India, Kutch.
And when my dad was born and as he grew up and all that, my dad was driving lorries for my granddad.
And at that time my granddad had built up quite a business with cotton, soap, oil, all that, you know.
So dad was driving for him, driving the lorries and that.
And then he sent dad to India because that's what people used to do.
They send your kids or go see where, you know, because dad was born in Uganda, but he'd never been to India.
So dad went out there and he found the place fascinated, like, you know, and dad was so easy going everybody loved him.
And while he was there, now this is the story my mum told me.
My mum and her friends used to go to school and things like that and they'd go to the mosque in the evenings and they'd see my dad and his friends and that.
And she used to say, oh look at them, like, you know, they can't, you know, behave themselves and all that.
What she didn't realise that when she got home one day after quite a few months, dad's grandfather had arranged to marriage, arranged the marriage between mum and dad.
And he told dad, he said, you know, going back to Uganda without a bride.
And that bride happened to be mum.
My daughter needs to look at you and sort.
No.
Yeah, so it was quite nice.
But I found out that they sort of arrived in Uganda and it was only a couple of months after I was born.
Yeah.
So I was born in 57 November 57.
So I'm assuming my parents got back from India in August, October, November around there.
You know, so yeah.
And you were born in Uganda.
I was born in Uganda in Saroti.
Yeah.
30th of November, 1957.
So it was good.
Yeah.
We stayed.
What was your childhood like in Saroti?
Well, I can remember my school days where I lived with my uncles and aunties and that with my grandparents.
And it was quite hard.
It was quite hard.
You know, it was hard work and being sort of kids and you've got it wrong, your aunties would give you a slap.
But, you know, so yeah, we did all right.
Did all right.
But I wouldn't say it was how can I put it?
Sometimes it wasn't very pleasant, but it's OK.
OK.
We we learned and basically me and Yashmin, my sister, we stayed there.
And then I can't exactly remember how old I was when we went to Mbali then with mum and dad.
I can't quite remember that.
But then in Mbali, I remember my school days.
I remember my senior days in the senior school.
And I used to have fun, lots of sports.
I always remember that we on top of the street where we were, it was a school field and we'd play football there and cycling and that.
And we always sit down on a weekend listening to Arsenal playing because Arsenal was our favourite team.
Used to love listening to the radio.
And yeah, it's good.
And as I said, I used to play a lot of sports.
I used to do athletics.
I used to play cricket, hockey, football and squash was one of my love.
I loved playing squash.
In fact, I carried on with squash and cycling when I came to Britain.
I enjoyed that.
So when Amin gave the notice that three months time you've got to leave, what was that like for your family, your parents?
Oh, it was chaos.
It was, you know, we were all trying to and you had I think it was close to 800000 people trying to leave the country.
And you can imagine what chaos that caused.
And we landed.
Well, mum and they were still in Mbali, but I went to Kampala to help dad because we had to get our visas and things like that.
And I remember the square.
You had all the main embassies, you had the Canadian, the British, the Americans, the Red Cross.
They were all there.
And I remember four four queues outside the British Embassy, four across, and it was going round the block.
Right. So you had so many people trying to.
Now, my memory of that was I used to sleep the night there on the pavement to keep my place and dad would come there in the morning and take over.
So I would go home, have a couple of hours sleep, something to eat, and I go back down in the afternoon for dad to come home and have some food.
So this is how we kept the place to get not to lose the queue.
And some of the things were happening in the queues were just, oh, and you get to know people when you're there day in, day out.
And I seen this young boy.
He happened to see his father in the queue for the wrap.
And he ran to see his father and the guys from the army caught him.
They were and he said, that's my dad, my dad.
I just want to be with my dad.
And they wouldn't listen to him.
They thought he was jumping the queue and all that.
And.
Oh, that was that was a horrible sight to see.
They tied him to the bars of the Jeep and they took the canopy off.
And he was tied there and they were whipping him going up and down the street to show people that you can't get away with it.
You know, so that was horrible.
I was to see a young kid.
He was no, no bigger, no older than me.
You know, and I was only what, 14, you know, and to see that.
But that was only one of the things some of the army guys, they used to just whip people walking along and they they had the big long whips like that.
And they just hit you for no reason at all.
Like, you know, because I mean, that basically corrupted their mind to say we were robbing the country and all that, you know, because initially he started picking on the Jews.
Right.
The things he came out and said about the Jews.
I always remember that.
And then he started saying about the British and the Asians.
And, you know, that's what killed the country.
Because once everybody left, the country just collapsed.
You know, the economy just collapsed.
But I always remember that I was there sleeping in the night.
Well, I was there in the afternoons for dad to come home.
Then he'd come back for an hour or so.
And then I'd go back in the night and I'd sleep on the pavement, keeping the place.
And we had to do it.
And I was the oldest son.
So I had to do it.
And then dad would help his brothers and sisters and help granddad and grandma.
And it got a little bit hectic then because one of the memories I remember is my dad's younger brother.
He forgot the key to his shop.
And he thought, well, it's his shop.
And he broke the door open.
Well, the army arrested him.
And he landed up in a camp where once you go in there, you never seen they were whipping and killing people like a concentration camp.
Always remember that because a lot of photographs came out later on where people were tied to the posts.
But lucky enough, dad was a man of many talents, I would say.
And he got to know one of the guards and he sort of made a deal.
What exactly he paid them, what he did, I don't know.
But he managed to get my uncle out of there and straight on a plane with granddad and grandma with the Red Cross.
And they managed to get away to America.
So that was a good thing that he saved his brother.
But yeah, there was some horrible sights when I was in Mbali before I went to Kampala.
Our neighbor, one of the neighbors, they took her, you know.
And there was so much raping and pillaging and that going on.
And one of the things I remember as well is everybody was selling their stuff.
So mum was selling everything off.
And now this is a good bit, this is, which was really shocking.
Mum was selling all the stuff and there was a boat with a light in it, electric light.
And the army jeep stopped outside the house and they came up and Shabila, who was there with mum, started screaming, crying and screaming.
And this guy said, the army guy said, whoa, whoa, whoa, don't start screaming.
We're not here to hurt you. We just want to see where you go for sale.
And they were looking at the boat.
And mum said, oh yeah, yeah, you can have it. No, no, we will pay for it.
And I can promise you, nobody will touch you.
None of my men will touch you. I guarantee you.
And I always remember mum saying that and he actually bought the boat and he paid for it.
Yeah, yeah, he actually paid for it.
But my worst memory.
Now, how can I put this? I'd say it as it is.
I was on my way into town and I was going to go from Jamath Khanna first.
As you know, Jamath Khanna is a mosque, our mosque.
And I always remember I'm coming past the Hindu temple and just past the Hindu temple, there's a big green.
And I'm walking along the green and all of a sudden a car pulls up and a jeep behind the car, an army jeep.
And they're all screaming in Swahili, right, telling this man and his son to get out of the car.
And the boy got out, but the old man couldn't get out in time.
And I'm basically, there's the pavement, the road, there's the pavement and I'm by, that's how close.
I'd say about two metres.
And they just walk up, beat the boy with the stick and the other one come round and he just took his gun out and shot the old man through the window.
And that, I just froze and I was standing there and I literally peed myself.
I wet myself and I was shaking like hell and I thought I'm next because I've seen this happening.
But because they seen that I was a young boy, I was shaking, I was scared.
There's no way I was a threat.
And they just jumped in the car and drove off.
Asians, yeah, but I can't, I didn't know them, I can't remember them.
All I can remember is that thing, he come out, he beat the boy, one of them beat the boy and the other one shot the old man because he couldn't get out of the car quick enough.
And that was the worst thing.
I thought that was the end of me that day.
I really thought that was the end of me.
But they could see I was no threat to them.
I was shaking, I wet myself, I ran back home and mum found me under the bed.
And that's the second time mum found me under the bed.
And the second time was in Kampala.
That was the first time mum found me.
So the first time was in Mabale.
In Mabale, yeah.
Second time was Kampala.
Now what had happened, I'm a big Western fan, right?
I love Westerns.
So they were showing the good, the bad and the ugly.
Now in Uganda, they used to have shows from the West.
They used to have shows from afternoon shows.
Then you had three to six, then three to nine, nine to twelve.
So I went to see the good, the bad and the ugly, nine to twelve.
So as kids, nothing was, you know, so we didn't really...
So we were walking through now and I seen, we were coming through the mosque in Kampala.
I seen all the lights on it.
It was late for lights, you know, and all these army jeeps.
So I jumped on, curious, jumped on a bin to have a look through the window.
And all I could see was lots and lots of army men with guns and people on the floor.
Spread out eagles.
They were trying to rob the place.
Take anything they could get and money, you know, because they knew money there.
And I thought, wow, what's happening?
And I tried to jump off.
And as I jumped, the bin fell over.
And I run.
And I mean I run.
All I could hear was machine gun fire behind me.
Screaming and shouting, all that and all that.
All I did was I just dived into this ditch, right?
I went under into the ditch all the way, crawled right out to the other side of the road.
Right, because this was a long ditch all the way through the tunnel, all the way out to the other side.
I was absolutely soaking, dirt, everything.
And I just run.
I just run.
I remember jumping over a fence, like a hedge.
And that was it.
And that was the second time mum found me under the bed.
I was that scared.
That's the only twice I can think I was in danger.
Did they traumatise you?
I don't know what.
I think I was pretty strong.
It didn't really, right?
I just basically forgot about it.
You know, it was basically my mind blocking it, I suppose.
I don't know.
I'm not a psychiatrist or anything, but I suppose that's what it...
And kids tend to be resilient.
And I just...
And the third time was quite...
I thought, oh, am I going to make it?
Mum gave me a ring to put on because all the kids were very...
to see if we could get something out, like, you know?
And we got to the airport, Intay Bay Airport, and they were checking everybody.
Nobody was getting out of there.
They were taking all the necklaces off and the rings off.
And they put me in this room and they stripped me.
Basically, I was standing there with my pants.
That's it, right?
And they were like little shorts, homemade things like mum had made.
And they took the ring off my hands, right?
And they just stripped me clean.
And then all of a sudden, lucky enough, I was out of the room.
And then all of a sudden, lucky enough, the phone rang.
So the woman went to answer the phone, and she was barking away on the phone,
shouting at somebody.
And I just grabbed all my clothes, checked them on quick,
and walked out straight onto the plane.
Right?
And it was a British Caledonian plane, right?
So they couldn't board that.
They couldn't have the British territory.
And I was lucky I got on there.
And when I got on there, I noticed mum and the sisters and brothers and that.
And we were lucky we got out there, right?
Now, what exactly happened with the rest of them, I don't know.
But that day, I thought, now was it like, you know,
especially when they made me strip, I thought, oh no.
Because they were checking that we weren't hiding anything under our clothes and that.
And yeah, I was lucky.
I just grabbed all my clothes.
She was barking on the phone.
And I just slowly opened the door and walked out.
That's brilliant.
Yeah.
I just walked out, run up the runway straight onto the plane.
Because they didn't have buses and things like that.
There were people who just walk into the planes.
And that's what happened.
And once we were on the plane, brilliant.
And I remember that flight, right?
I remember that flight because we stopped in Benghazi.
We stopped in Benghazi.
They fueled up.
We weren't allowed to get off the plane, but they fueled up.
And then we flew to Britain.
And we landed at Stensted Airport.
And it was November.
And as I was on top of the steps coming out,
all you could see was frost everywhere.
It was freezing.
So when we got down, they were going through all the customs
and everything and that.
I'm waiting, waiting, waiting.
They'd lost all my luggage.
They'd lost all my suitcases.
I had three suitcases.
They'd lost them all.
All I had was literally what I was wearing.
Did they find them?
No.
But I'll come to that after.
They found when we came, we boarded the buses.
We didn't know where we were going.
So they drove from Stensted Airport to Gaydon.
And they called it Gaydon Resettlement Center.
Basically, it was a refugee camp, you know?
But it wasn't bad.
It was lovely.
When we got there, they gave me clothes
because they could see I was cold.
They gave me clothes.
I put my clothes on, warmed up, and they had opened the kitchens up
and we had food and everything.
They fed us well, you know?
Really good.
Brilliant.
You know, tidy.
That was a nice welcome.
How long were you there?
We got there in November and we left there in March,
the following year, 73.
So I think it was March the 14th I arrived in Penrith.
But Dad had arrived a week earlier with the kids
because Mum wasn't very well.
So I stayed behind with her until she was well enough to travel.
And yeah, that's another story to tell.
It was just, how can I say?
My stomach was churning and yet I was excited, you know?
But in the camp itself are some marvellous times
and some horrendous times as well.
You get all the elderly people would find a little corner
and they'll play the cards, you know?
And then you had us youngsters with our radios.
I used to go play a lot of badminton and table tennis.
So I was never hanging around.
I was out playing.
And there was a university professor from Leamington Spa
who used to pick us up in a minibus
and take us to play badminton and table tennis all over the place.
But the one thing I used to have in the Midlands a lot was racial problems.
Racial, terrible names and they scream and shout
and tell you go where you came from and all that, you know?
And you had lots of...
But a 15-year-old kid then, you know,
and some of the boys were a little bit older than me who were with me,
they just wanted to fight everybody.
And I didn't, like my old man, my father,
he would have just slapped one of them and that'd be it.
Now with me I was more like mum.
I didn't want to know, I didn't want to fight at all, so I just walk away.
And don't get me wrong, if it came to the crunch I stood my ground.
But I didn't want to get into situations like that,
but there was a lot of racial problems.
We had a few problems when we went playing badminton and table tennis and that.
Yeah.
But in the camp we had a lot of youngsters thinking they ruled the roost.
They gang this and they gang that and all that.
And they were harassing all the old men and everything.
And I always remember my cousin's father, Kareem Khasab and Firoz Khasab,
their father and his friends, they loved playing cards.
And they used to sit in the corner playing
and for weeks on end nobody would disturb them.
But this gang tried to take over to say,
we are ruling the camp and we are the bosses here and all that.
They walked in there with a big jack-o-blaster
and they were blasting the music and all that.
So they kept harassing the old men.
And then one day Kareem's father said to my dad,
oh look, can you do something about this, like can you help us?
So dad walked in there and he told him, excuse me boys, can you take that out?
And he wouldn't listen until dad heavy handed.
He just laid them out.
He'd done a good job on them and he smashed their jack-o-blaster
and he told them, you ever come in here again, you'll have another one again.
So this particular boy, he knew a Sikh guy in another camp.
And they were the big guys, like you know, he said,
I'm going to bring him over here and I will sort this guy out.
That's my dad, like you know.
So there's word going around the camp, oh this is going to happen and all that.
You know how it is? Everybody's on alert.
And oh that was, oh my God, Chandrika, that was absolutely amazing what happened.
And he had this big fence post with sharp end
and he was going to stab dad with it, like you know, with standing behind this guy.
So this one evening now, bus comes along, a car comes along
and there's loads of men and this guy comes out of the car, Sikh guy.
So that guy with the fence post, he runs over, he tells them, come on in, he said, let's go in there.
So we're all in the reception now. I'm worried about talking to my dad.
And all the boys were there and cousins were there, we're all there now.
And this guy walks in and he flings the doors open to make his entrance like.
So dad is just sitting there, you know, he's so calm and cool.
He didn't care, dad never cared.
Because dad could handle himself, you know, he wasn't, you wouldn't, you wouldn't just pick on Bahadur, you know.
Bahadur Ahmad Haji Pabani, you definitely wouldn't.
And if you did pick on him, you'd have someone to pick on and somebody leave you his mark.
So anyway, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So dad got up now because he could hear the noise and the commotion.
And the fellow walks in, dad opens the door where the guys are playing and he comes out, he shuts the door behind him.
And they look at each other, right.
So they walk up to each other now and this guy now with the post thinks like we got him now, you know, can see Bahadur now.
He's panicking. And he walked up to each other and they grabbed each other and gave each other a big hug.
And I said, hi, how are you doing? All that, you know.
So he said to my dad, he said, what's happening?
He said, who is this guy I'm supposed to meet up and it's me.
He said, you are? Yeah, it's me.
I gave him a slap so he brought you in to sort me out.
Leave it with me, he said, he turned around, grabbed that boy by the throat.
He said, let me tell you something now.
You lay a finger on him, I'm going to shove that bar up your arse.
I tell you, I couldn't believe it.
And dad, you know, dad knew him from the belly.
Like, you know, brilliant.
It was great. It was really nice.
And we never had any problems after that.
Never. But dad was number one there.
He really just kept everything cool.
He didn't get into any hassle, enjoyed himself.
But dad was working, see, because within two days of us arriving in the camp,
dad went looking for work.
And because we already had British passports,
we managed to get our national insurance number.
Our dad had his national insurance number straight away.
So he went to Coventry, looked for work and he had a job in the Fords.
Wow, OK.
And he worked in Ford, so he'd work away for the week
and come home on the weekends.
In the camp. In the camp, yeah.
And we did that till March.
And they said to dad that there's a place in South Wales and it's nice.
Well, Firoz and Carine Babani, Kassam and them,
they were originally from the camp here in Wales.
In Tonfenay.
And they said, oh, come over here, it's lovely and all that.
So this is why we came here.
Dad came over first, because as I said, mum wasn't well and I stayed behind.
Dad came on his own first to have a look around,
seen the house in Penrith they offered, liked it.
So because he liked it, he went straight into Cardiff to look for work.
Right. And he went to Cardiff and he found work straight away
in a company called Edward Currens in Cardiff.
And they told him, yeah, fine, because dad was mechanic by trade.
So he was a tool handler.
And then he learned to drive trains because he was driving trains as well.
And he had a job straight away.
So he came back, arranged it all great.
He was going to take all the kids first.
And I was to stay there with mum and come the following week.
So I said, yeah, great.
So like I said, I'm not quite sure, but I'm pretty sure.
99.9% sure it was the 14th of March, 1973, we arrived in Penrith.
And we drove the bus through the valleys and going to Penrith.
Now, I'm all excited because it's a new adventure for a 15 year old kid.
But there again, I'm a little bit apprehensive as well.
And when we get to Penrith, I started, oh, my God, my stomach was churning.
There was a gang of skinheads.
And I'm thinking, oh, no, no, please, no.
And I was really panicking now.
So there's a gang of skinheads, loads of neighbours and everybody.
Dad had come out with the kids as well.
You know, they're all there and all excited.
So we got off the bus and oh, my God, what a welcome.
What a welcome.
Absolutely amazing welcome from all the neighbours and that.
And the gang of skinheads, they were brilliant.
And the leader of the gang, whose name is Keith Harris, who I still keep in touch with,
after getting to know everybody, I started dating his sister.
I started dating his sister, Kim.
And I keep in touch with her as well.
And you can imagine, like, my stomach just, that relief, like, you know,
to think that the boys, the skinheads who were giving me trouble in the midlands,
and they're completely different over here, like, you know, brilliant, brilliant.
Loved it.
What was it like in Penrith, early days?
Well, early days, we started school and it was nice.
I was going to Ferndale Comprehensive School.
They called it Ferndale, but it's actually situated in Mardie.
So, yes, I was going there and I just couldn't settle in school.
Just couldn't settle.
And I went to school from March to the following April.
But before that, what I used to do, I used to bunk school and work in Tilerstone Co-op.
Did you?
In the warehouse.
Yeah.
And only part-time, like, you know.
And it started off right opposite the shop in Tilerstone was a little corner shop,
which later on became a chemist.
But before it became a chemist, it used to be a second-hand shop.
And I always remember a record player in there.
And I loved it, I did, because when we left the camp,
where we used to do discos in the camp, I used to help the guy.
He gave me a box full of singles.
Wow.
So I had all these singles, right, but no record player.
So I asked Mum, could she give me money to buy that?
And she said, look, we can't afford it.
You'll have to work and save up yourself.
So that's what I did.
I was bunking school, working in Tilerstone Co-op.
And as soon as I had enough money, which I always remember was five pounds,
I went and bought, because he used to give me a couple of pennies here and there
for doing the work.
So that record player was five pounds.
Five pounds. And I bought that in that shop.
Wow.
And yeah, it was brilliant.
And I think with Mum and Dad, they taught us the work ethic.
That, look, we are in a country, it's new to us,
we can't afford all these fancy things and that.
So you want something, you're going to have to work for it.
And you're going to have to save it yourself, right?
So Mum and Dad always say that.
Dad used to, because he was a mechanic,
he used to repair people's cars to bring in extra money.
Now, by 591, there was a row of garages and Dad had four of them.
He rented four of them.
And everybody used to come from all over the place.
And word of mouth got around that there's a guy who repairs cars
and he'll do anything.
And then it didn't matter whether it was raining, sunny, snowing, whatever.
Come on, Al-Nashir, we're changing the gearbox today.
And he gave me out of bed.
Oh, my God, I hate it.
I hate it.
And we used to change the gearbox and engines.
And I learned quite a bit, learned quite a bit.
And most of the work was either done in the evenings or weekends.
Because when I was 16 then, the guy in Tidastown Co-op said to me
that when you're 16, I'll get you a job in the main warehouse.
So I couldn't leave school in September because my birthday was in November.
Right?
So I had to work till April, right?
And April the 16th, 1974, these dates are still stuck in my head.
I started working for the co-op full time in Tiaro.
Wow, okay.
And I used to do 40 hours a week and I used to get paid seven pounds something.
That's all, for 40 hours.
That was in 74.
And my cousin used to come down from London.
And one day he said to me, he said, why don't you come and work with me?
He said, I'll get you some money, you know.
Yeah, so basically when my cousin said, look, you know, why don't you come in?
I'll help you.
So every Friday he used to jump in the car, go with him.
And I'd work night shift on Friday and night shift on Saturday.
And then come back on Sunday, ready for Monday in the co-op.
And I did that for a while, but traveling all the way all the time was getting too much.
But, you know, to make money and just earn something extra, I used to have quite a few jobs.
I used to work 40 hours a week in the co-op.
In Tonipandi, right next to the main square, the upper square, there used to be an old picture room.
And I used to be in Usher there.
Right. I used to work there every evening after the co-op.
Then Saturday morning, I used to work in Penry's Spa.
Right. And the manageress, Linda, I still see her now.
Yeah. She still is gorgeous as she was then.
She is lovely.
And then Saturday afternoon and Sunday, I used to work in Tonipandi Petrol Station.
So I was constantly working, earning five a year, five a year there.
You know, because in them days wages weren't much.
Gosh, so you've got the same work ethics as your father.
Well, yeah, you had to do it.
And I think I had the same thing with my father.
I used to spend it as well.
So I used to give some to my mother and then by the weekend I'd say,
Mom, can I borrow some money?
So yes, it was all right. It was.
And then, what can I say?
Things in Penry's were lovely.
I enjoyed my time up there, but it was quite expensive.
Renting a home up there, you know, very expensive.
Dad kept on working and when he had an accident in the factory where he worked
and he lost his fingers, a couple of fingers and damaged his thumb.
So when he used to repair cars, he couldn't quite do it all
because he couldn't grip the nuts and bolts and stuff like that.
So Alan and Sheer had to step up, you know, and oh, God, it was...
I think that put me off becoming a mechanic, you know.
And yeah, well, we did it.
And then with Dad having his compensation for losing his fingers and that,
he bought a house in Pollypreet.
So which year was that?
Well, you know what? I can't quite remember.
I was 23, 24, something like that.
And then when Dad moved, I stayed behind because I was caught in Kathleen,
my ex-wife, and I decided to stay with her.
So she moved in with me and we were renting Dad's house then.
And I think it was the following year we decided to get married, you know, 82.
No, 81, sorry. 81, that's right.
And yeah, we were great. We were together for 38 years.
Yeah.
But marriages fall apart, so it happened.
And then I bought this house down here in 82, I think it was August 82.
And I've been here ever since, you know, so yeah.
Your first home in your home.
My first home, yeah, my own, yeah.
Yeah, and still here.
I'm still here, yes.
I built it up by buying the house next door.
And yeah, it's big.
I'm on my own, but you know, this is more like a family hub now
because Frida comes here, my little sister,
then my son Azad and Philip and Michelle, daughter, they all come in here, you know.
And yeah, Carl comes in sometimes, my son.
And the grandchildren, which is Ruben, Amber,
and Michelle's kids come here, Bethany and Abby and all that.
So yeah, I've got somebody here all the time.
You know, in one week somebody will show up, so it's nice.
And at one time I did think of selling up and moving to Spain.
I was thinking of moving to Benidorm, but when Yashmin passed away.
Yashmin's your sister.
Yashmin's my sister, yeah.
She passed away.
And yeah, everybody remembers us from the program I did with the BBC called Full House.
And then we did the series, the follow-up series of Full House, which was on BBC One.
And yeah, basically that's what I was supposed to do, a couple of other documentaries with Sky.
But that never progressed after.
They did the research and that.
It was all about Uganda nations coming to Wales.
And as it happened, then that didn't take off, but you're doing it now.
Yeah.
Tell me more about your sort of life now in Rwanda.
Well, I love the Rwanda.
All my brothers and sisters, they traveled away, moved away.
Like Kareem, my brother, he moved to Milton Keynes and he said he wouldn't come back to Wales.
He's done well for himself, you know.
He's accounted by trade.
And he's in Milton Keynes now since he was about 18, 19.
I mean, he worked with me in Grenada.
Then he worked for the government in St. Athens.
Now he's working in the Royal Mint.
Right.
So he moved from mum's house in Ponty to his own flat.
From his flat then he got married and now he's in Kilbernet.
Shabila went to Basin Stoke.
Shabila's your sister.
Shabila's my sister.
She trained in Bridgend as a nurse.
And she went to Basin Stoke.
From Basin Stoke, she's in Leicester now.
And she got married to my cousin Kareem.
And I mean, Farida, that's my little sister, she was working as a chef down in West Wales.
And then she got married to a local West Wailian and she lives in West Wales.
Yashmin married a Welshman as well.
And she stayed in Thrunapia.
Unfortunately, last year she passed away.
Sorry, no, 2022.
That's right, 2022 she passed away, not 2023.
And yeah, so it's just five of us left.
And I stayed in the Rhondda because I love the Rhondda.
And I try and do as much as I can.
I got my little charity events and all that.
Like I try and raise money for breast cancer by dyeing my hair pink every year.
And then we do something for cancer research.
And I haven't done nothing for two years, but we used to do collections for the homeless.
But I still advertise and things like that for the homeless on my Facebook page.
And on my radio show, I present a local radio station.
I'm a presenter on there, Rhondda radio.
And every so often I will mention homeless on there and things like that.
And basically when people get in touch with me, they ask me to advertise for them for something.
If it's a charity, we'll do it free.
But if it's anything personal, there's a charge.
So yeah, we're still doing, I'm still doing my little bit.
And yeah, I love it. I do. I love the Rhondda.
And you've worked all your life in the Rhondda?
Oh yes, yeah. I worked all my life.
Well, I worked all my life and I'm still working.
I should have retired last year in November, but I've continued working.
And I'm thinking of retiring later on this year in April, maybe June.
We'll see how things go, but nothing's definite.
But yeah, you know, it's quite surprising that I started off in the retail trade in the co-op.
And I'm going to finish off in ASDA in the retail trade again.
But in between, I have worked for several different companies as a salesman for just rentals.
And later on they were called by ASU.
I then worked for a company called, what was the other one?
I'm trying to think of the small company I went to work for.
They were selling Hoovers. They were selling Kirby Hoovers.
Kirby's, and I couldn't stick it there.
They expect us to sell a thousand pound Hoover and expect a little bit of commission.
And I said, no, it's a con.
So I give that up and went back to Granada, where there was a second state.
I stayed with Granada for another nine years.
I was with the co-op for 15 years.
Then I worked for just rentals for three years.
Then I went to Granada for nine years.
And I went to work for a German company called Mullatec.
And I started off as a warehouse worker, forklift driver.
And they put me through a little bit of training to do Six Sigma.
It's a green belt.
It's like a continuous improvement course and things like that.
And I passed it.
And they made me a trainer.
So I used to travel, you know, travel.
Well, it wasn't traveling actually.
I was just doing all the training in Wales.
And they asked us to show around the Japanese who came to visit.
And the guy who owns Toyota himself, his name is Toyota.
And he came dressed up in dungarees and all that.
And he guy, he's a multi, multi billionaire.
But he was dressed like any worker.
And they asked me to do a presentation.
And I said, what?
I said, you're joking.
I said, I've never done anything like that.
Well, he said, you do the manifest every day.
All you've got to do is just explain what you're doing.
I said, oh, God, here we go.
Well, me being cheeky, you know, I made a good impression.
So when I finished, I banded everything ready.
Got it all for shipment, signed it.
And they said, oh, thank you and all that.
They went away.
And next thing I know, there's a Tanoy announcement.
Could Nasir come up to the office?
So I went up in the office and everybody said, yeah, come on in, come on in.
And all the Japanese guys moved their chairs for me to sit down.
I said, no, no, I'm all right, you know.
No, no, they wanted me to sit next to the boss.
So I sat down next to the boss and I could see all my bosses looking.
And I was looking at them.
There's nothing I can do.
They just, and my boss just nodded to me and winked.
He said, you're all right, don't worry.
And they were asking questions and I was telling them slow
because he couldn't understand his interpreter.
I had to tell him.
And I just said to him, I said, what do you think of me?
What do you think of me getting all the parts ready for one of the best cars in the world?
And he laughed then.
He said, you reckon it's a good guy?
I said, I think it's a fabulous guy.
I said, I've driven it once.
Oh, he said, we'll have to arrange for you to drive the others.
So we got quite chocked here now.
And it went so, went really well it did.
And when I went back down, they said, oh, you're going to have food?
I said, oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, you stay.
You're having food.
So anyway, I stayed for food and everything.
And when it all finished and they all went away, the German boss came downstairs
and he called me and he said, come on, they want to see you in the office.
And I said, oh, no, what have I done?
Automatically thinking I've done something wrong.
And the guy who owned the company, Mullatec, his son was there.
He looked after the Welsh end of it and the European end of it.
And he said, and he shook my hand, he said, absolutely amazing.
He said, you did a fantastic job.
And he said, they were so impressed with you.
They really liked what you did and the way you did it.
And he said, the way you were explaining everything, that's more,
they understood more of that than what you were making jokes.
He said the humor side of it, but he said the explanation of it all,
the way you described it all, he said they were more pleased about that.
So brilliant, that's great.
And that's when they offered me to become a trainer.
Fantastic.
And I become a trainer.
And then we had another contingency from France who came to have a look
what we were doing and all that.
So again, they picked me to show them how I did everything and all that.
And because I'd been doing this for quite a while now,
we were there in the office and I just said to them, I said, look,
if you want any help, I said, just give us a ring and I'll guide you through.
It doesn't matter.
So a couple of weeks down the road, a couple of months down the road,
I was called into the office.
I said, you know the people we had here from France, they need some help.
Will you help them?
I said, yeah.
You want me to phone them?
No, no, he said, we want you to go out to France.
I said, what?
Yeah, he said, we want you to go out there and train them.
So yeah, that's great.
I said, the only thing is I haven't got a passport.
Nobody said we'll get it for you and they applied for it.
They made every sorted flight, the lot.
Well, I got to France and well, yeah, they asked me to go to France.
I said, yeah, okay.
Anyway, when I get to France, I find out the warehouses were half a mile down the road
and they said, yeah, we'll take you down everything.
They picked me up from the airport and all this, like, you know,
and quite away from Paris Airport, like Charles de Gaulle, it was called.
So anyway, when we got to the warehouse, there was nothing in there, nothing at all.
Not one shelf, just a wooden warehouse, all wooden.
I said, well, I can't train anybody in this.
I said, you've got nothing here.
Oh, no, no, we don't want you to train anybody.
That comes after.
I said, what do you mean?
I said, I've been told I've got to train nine people.
No, no, he said it'll be quite a lot of people you'll be training.
But we want you to set this up like you got in Wales.
I said, what? You serious? Yeah, we want you to set it up.
Because what was happening, the Toyota Yaris was being built in France.
And they wanted me to build up.
But they wanted me to do it in a way so they had rocking for Renault, rocking for Nissan,
rocking for all the companies they were dealing with.
But my main aim was to set it up like it was in Wales.
I thought to myself, oh, my God, I've never done anything like this.
So I phoned Germany and I said, listen, I thought you said I was training nine people.
But I said, you realize there's nothing here.
Well, of course, we thought we told you.
I said, no, you didn't tell me.
He said, we want you to set it all up.
I said, well, I don't mind.
I said, it's going to be a challenge because I've never done anything like this.
Oh, you can do it.
Well, yeah, I'm going to have a go.
But I said, I need somebody then who's going to be interpreting and everything.
And when I need things, who do I order it with?
He said, the manager.
You just tell him what you want and we'll give him the budget to do it.
I said, all right, OK.
So I thought, right, OK, now I know what I'm doing.
Well, now I know what I've got to do.
I'll have to sit down, go through my mind, what we need, what we've got to do and all that.
Now, the Six Sigma, I also did through a Japanese company called the Kanban System.
And it basically you got to make the parts and tell them when you want it, when you need it and all that.
So I was stumped.
Now, how am I going to do?
Now, you've got a warehouse half a mile away, factory there.
How do you correspond?
You can't keep going on the phone all the time.
Anyway, I said, right, we'll do that.
I said, can I have today off?
I need to find a hotel.
Oh, we've done it all.
He said, your hotel is booked everything.
So, all right, OK.
So they took me to my hotel.
First, I went around meeting everybody.
I met the manager.
Then I met the assistant manager.
Then I met all these different people in different offices.
And then they took me to the factory.
And there was a little pedestal there where you stand on the pedestal.
Say hello.
How are you?
So, brilliant.
So I thought to myself, you know, this is and he said the interpreter, they give me, you know, Lionel in Britain, you know, he's my interpreter.
Six languages, they could speak.
Fantastic guy.
Really nice guy.
So he explained to me, he said, you know, when you come to work now, he said, you go to the manager's office, you say hello to him.
Then you go along, say hello to everybody.
Then you go into the factory and say hello to everybody there.
All right.
OK.
I said, yeah.
And he said, come and meet this young lady.
This is our secretary.
You need anything done.
She's the lady for you.
But I'll be with you.
So anything you need to do it.
I will do it.
I said, all right.
OK.
I said, look, I'm a bit tired now.
I've had a bit of a shock to what I got to do.
So if you don't mind, I'll have the night off now.
Relax, enjoy.
And then we'll start in the morning.
I said, can you pick me up?
Yes.
Yeah.
He said, we'll send the car for you.
Great.
So the following day, I just went through the motion.
Hello.
Fine.
And I told him, I'm going to send the car for you.
Great.
So the following day, I just went through the motion.
Hello.
Fine.
And I told him, I'm going to send the car for you.
Hello.
And I told him, I said, well, look, we're going to need racking.
We're going to need to mark out how we're going to do everything.
Anyway, blah, blah, blah.
Then it all great.
Mark out the floor first.
And then I said, we'll get the racking up, but we don't want to bolt it.
Because what I want to do is try it out.
And if it doesn't work, we can move the racking so it's not bolted.
And we'll be able to do it.
I said, I need a forklift driver.
All right.
OK.
Down comes this lady.
I said, I need three.
Down comes another lady and another one.
I said, oh, you got all lady driver.
He said, all production is done by men.
All driving on forklifts is women.
Oh, right.
OK.
I said, can you tell me why?
He said, the women are more careful.
OK.
So I told him, look, I want this moved.
They're moved anywhere.
Great.
And you know what I liked about the French was, when I left them a list at the end of
the week to say, look, I want this done by the time I come back, I had no hassles at
all.
It was all done.
In fact, you now would phone me up and say, oh, look, can I do this?
Can I do that?
So they were doing a lot more.
But when I did that in Wales, I had hell of a time.
Hello.
Just wouldn't listen.
How many years did you do that job?
Nine years?
Yeah, nine years.
That's right, nine years.
I enjoyed it.
I did really enjoyed it.
And what I enjoyed most was thinking on my feet.
And one of the problems I mentioned was the distance between the factory and the, and
do you know how I solved that?
I happened to be sitting in the hospital.
Yeah.
And when you're in a waiting room, what do you notice most?
Trullies.
No?
No.
You've got a light going round telling you waiting time is four hours continuous.
Yeah.
Right?
And then it goes red and it tells you a different time.
Then it goes green and green.
So automatically it's going green, red, green, red, green, red.
And sometimes you notice the amber on the side.
I said, that's what I want.
Traffic light system for the parts.
So when I went back to France, I said to the guy, I said, let's go in the workshop.
So I noticed, looked around everywhere and say now, for instance, that's the manager's
office.
And this is a big wall up here above the machine.
Opposite the manager's office, yeah?
Yeah.
Right?
Opposite the, I said, that's what I want.
So I phoned him up.
I said, I want the manager.
I said, not the workshop manager, the main manager.
I said, I want a 65 inch TV, please.
And I want somebody who's good with the internet.
Yeah.
So we went to the warehouse.
We put the TV up on this side, connected to the internet.
I went to the warehouse then and I said to him, I said, right, what I want you to do
is send a message to that TV screen, right, with a big red dot.
Right.
So he did it.
And he picked up the phone.
He said, I just seen this message.
What are you going to talk for?
Can you see the message?
Is it clear?
Yes, that's great.
So I designed a system that when we need a part, right, it'll show red.
The part number next to it will be the tool number, right, and the quantity of parts.
And it'll go along, right?
So every time we needed parts, which was red, if they got the parts ready, he'll put it
on number and when it gets to the warehouse and it's in stock there, it'll go to green.
So everybody had a job to do and they didn't have to phone each other.
It was all done internally on the internet.
I said, we're going to try this now.
So I said to him, I said, what parts are we going to need urgently?
And he mentioned some parts.
I said, right, give me the number and that.
So I told him what to do and he put it all on there.
And he came up on the screen and the manager seen it and he said, that's what I said.
Yeah, you can see it.
It's telling you what we need.
But I said, don't forget now when you're actually doing the parts and you've got the amber,
you've got to calculate how long it's going to take you to get it to the warehouse.
You don't want to leave it too long.
So anyway, I loved it.
I did.
But then when I came back, there was a young boy who would just come out with a little
boy who would just come out to university and he become my manager.
Apparently, while I was away, there was a bit of a dispute or something.
And the guy who was the manager, they demoted him to some other department.
And this boy took over and he was all knew it all and all that.
And the first job he said to me, he said, oh, I got a thing by for you.
He said, look what I did right by.
So what's that?
He said, oh, the Nissan still edges.
I've devised this now to put all the still edges there.
He said, you know, look, I said, yeah, great.
I had to look at it.
And as soon as I looked at it, I went, it's not going to work.
What do you mean it's not going to work?
I said, it's not going to work.
You're going to be at least 12 still edges out.
Can't.
He said, I measured them all.
I said, yes, I can see you measured them, but you've forgotten the cups.
Got a cup on top.
So the leg would fit into the cup and he wouldn't slip.
Well, he had measured them.
That was half an inch out.
So because I showed him up a bit, he didn't like it.
Now, I didn't try to show him up.
I just told him because it was only me and him and he didn't like it.
And he made things hard for me.
In the end, I just thought I got to get out of there.
Can't stick it.
Yeah.
But I love my job in Asda.
I absolutely love it.
It's absolutely.
If my health wasn't bad, honest to God, I would stay there as long as I can.
The customers are just amazing people.
The bosses, my manager, S Jackie born.
She is just brilliant.
She's so fair and lovely.
She she'll help you as much as she can.
If she can't, she'll tell you straight.
Sorry, you can't do it.
I love my job.
But the customers are Asda's customers.
They're all my friends.
And I get recognized all over the world.
I go to Benidorm.
I get people.
Went on a cruise to the Mediterranean.
Hey, that's brilliant.
They either know me from the TV, Asda or on the radio.
OK.
Yeah.
I love it.
I do love it.
So Ronda is your home.
Oh, Ronda is definitely my home.
Yeah.
Definitely.
And all the Ronda people are my sisters and brothers.
Oh, they are.
They definitely are.
Yeah.
Lovely.
And you've got five children.
I got five children.
And how many grandchildren?
Thirteen grandchildren.
And how many great grandchildren?
I got four at the moment and I've soon to be five.
Five.
Gosh.
Yeah.
I don't look that old, do I?
No, you don't.
You and I are the same age, so I would never say you look old.
You don't.
Yeah.
Fantastic.
I love it.
I love the Ronda.
And I got some lovely friends.
And I genuinely honest now, if I was in trouble and I was to put anything on my social media
or all the phone numbers I got, I can have somebody here within minutes helping me.
Yeah.
Honest, it's been brilliant.
Brilliant.
And I just hope now that things will work out with my health and I'll make a decision
then whether to retire and enjoy life, you know?
Yeah.
So, yeah.
But I can't imagine that you will just be sitting around.
Oh, no.
You would always do something.
No.
I definitely will be.
If I retire, right, I won't say if, I'll say when, because I intend to retire, I will
probably do a little bit more radio work and I'll do school work because a lot of schools
hire us and we take our trailer to the schools for the music and the discos and things like
that.
That's from the because of the radio.
For the radio, right?
Yeah.
And we do occasions like the Christmas fair, when the radio gets involved with that.
We do the Christmas markets, the one the radio gets involved with that.
So, I will have something to do all the time, you know?
And me being mouthy, they normally throw me in the front end anyway.
Yeah.
So, yeah, I'll probably be doing a lot more.
Like at the moment I'm doing Monday, Tuesday and Saturday shows.
If it comes to the crunch that somebody's on holiday, I'll cover their show for them.
When I'm on holiday, they'll cover my show, you know?
So, with a bit of luck.
It's lovely.
Yeah.
Yeah, sounds really good.
I enjoy it.
I do.
I am hoping, because I've noticed there is so many Asians moving to Rwanda.
Oh, are they?
Oh, there's every corner got a shot now.
Oh, really?
Honestly, you want to see the Asians who moved in here?
Yeah.
I am hoping to start an hour long program with just Bollywood songs.
Oh, gosh.
Hour long, just Bollywood songs.
But I'm going to pitch that to the manager.
In fact, they wanted me to do that about two years ago.
But because there wasn't a lot to ask.
Do you know what?
My best, my favorite listener for Bollywood songs is a German lady called Sabine Kommerl.
All the way from Baden-Baden.
Oh, that's okay.
Every Saturday she'll text me first thing in the morning,
Nash, don't forget my Bollywood song.
Okay.
How are you today?
Brilliant.
That's it.
She's a physiotherapist, she is.
And I met her in India five years ago.
Okay.
And we kept in touch.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
She's brilliant.
Thank you so much for that fantastic interview.